.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH RULEXDB_OPEN 3 "February 19, 2012"
.SH NAME
rulexdb_open \- open or create a rulex database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <rulexdb.h>
.sp
.BI "RULEXDB *rulexdb_open(const char *" path ", int " mode );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR rulexdb_open ()
function opens the rulex database in the file whose name is the string
pointed to by
.I path
and allocates and initializes all necessary internal data structures
associated with it.
.PP
The argument
.I mode
specifies a database access mode. It may accept one of the following
values:
.TP
.B RULEXDB_SEARCH
Open the database only for searching (read only mode).
.TP
.B RULEXDB_UPDATE
Open existing database for searching and updating (read and write
mode).
.TP
.B RULEXDB_CREATE
Create new database and open it for updating and searching.
.SH "DATABASE STRUCTURE"
The rulex database consists of two dictionaries and four sets
of rules. The \fBExplicit\fP dictionary contains the words that
are described individually and do not imply any information for
other forms. This dictionary is looked up first if the search
includes this stage. The \fBImplicit\fP dictionary contains
words in some basic form. This dictionary is used to construct
pronunciation string for various forms of these words. The basic
form of a word is guessed according to the rules from the
\fBClassifiers\fP and \fBPrefix detectors\fP rulesets. This is the
second stage of search process. If these stages do not bring a result
or are not performed the rules from the \fBGeneral\fP ruleset are used
to guess stressing word. If no one of these rules can be applied than
no guessing is made and search process fails.
.PP
Externally all the data are represented textually. For the Russian
letters the \fBkoi8\-r\fP character set is used and only lower case
is allowed.
.PP
Each dictionary record consists of two fields. The first field
contains Russian word that serves as a key when searching. Only
lowercase Russian letters are allowed here. The second field provides
pronunciation string for this word. The pronunciation string
is the word itself, but written in such a manner as it should
be pronounced. There are three additional symbols allowed
in the pronunciation string along with the lowercase
Russian letters. The "+" sign can be used to point the stressed
letter. It should be placed just after that letter. The "=" sign
is used in some cases just in the same manner to point so-called
weak stress. The "-" sign can serve as a separator in some complex
words. All other symbols are treated as illegal.
.PP
There are four rulesets in the database: \fBGeneral\fP rules,
\fBClassifiers\fP, \fBPrefix detectors\fP and
\fBCorrectors\fP. Externally all these rules are represented by
records consisting of one or two fields. The first field always
contains a regular expression which is matched against the word to
make a decision whether this rule can be applied.
.PP
The only task of \fBGeneral\fP rules is to guess stress
in the words when dictionary lookup fails. The rules are tried
sequentially until match or the list exhaustion. If match succeeds
then the "+" sign is inserted into the word right after the first
subexpression match to point stressing position.
 These rules do not contain a second field.
.PP
For the \fBClassifiers\fP ruleset each rule is checked one by one
until match occurs. Then the part from the beginning of the word
through to the end of the first subexpression match is extracted
and if a second field is present it is appended to the extracted
part as a suffix. The resulting string is treated as a basic form
of the word, so it is looked up in the \fBImplicit\fP dictionary.
If nothing is found the process continues
until the ruleset will be exceeded.
.PP
When nothing is found in the database for a word in its original form,
\fBPrefix detection\fP rules are applied to it sequentially up to the
first match. The matched prefix is stripped and replaced by the
replacement string if any. Then the result word is searched in the
\fBImplicit\fP dictionary. In the case of success the original prefix
is restored in the pronunciation string.
.PP
The rules from \fBCorrectors\fP ruleset are applied
to the pronunciation strings instead of the original words.
The second field in these rules specifies a regular replacement
string where digits serve as subexpression numbers.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
Upon successful completion
.BR rulexdb_open ()
return a
.I RULEXDB
pointer that should be used in other database access functions for
referencing the database.
Otherwise, NULL is returned.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rulexdb_classify (3),
.BR rulexdb_close (3),
.BR rulexdb_dataset_name (3),
.BR rulexdb_discard_dictionary (3),
.BR rulexdb_discard_ruleset (3),
.BR rulexdb_fetch_rule (3),
.BR rulexdb_lexbase (3),
.BR rulexdb_remove_item (3),
.BR rulexdb_remove_rule (3),
.BR rulexdb_remove_this_item (3),
.BR rulexdb_search (3),
.BR rulexdb_seq (3),
.BR rulexdb_subscribe_item (3),
.BR rulexdb_subscribe_rule (3)
.SH AUTHOR
Igor B. Poretsky <poretsky@mlbox.ru>.
