.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH RULEXDB_REMOVE_THIS_ITEM 3 "February 21, 2012"
.SH NAME
rulexdb_remove_this_item \- remove sequentially retrieved item from the rulex dictionary
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <rulexdb.h>
.sp
.BI "int rulexdb_remove_this_item(RULEXDB *" rulexdb ", int " item_type );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR rulexdb_remove_this_item ()
function removes the last accessed via
.BR rulexdb_seq (3)
lexical item from the dictionary dataset defined by
.I item_type
argument that may accept one of the following values:
.TP
.B RULEXDB_LEXBASE
Remove item from the \fBImplicit\fP dictionary.
.TP
.B RULEXDB_EXCEPTION
Remove item from the \fBExplicit\fP dictionary.
.PP
Note that the data type must be specified explicitly. The value
.B RULEXDB_DEFAULT
is not allowed here.
.PP
The argument
.I rulexdb
references the database to deal with.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
The
.BR rulexdb_remove_this_item ()
function returns
.B RULEXDB_SUCCESS
which is zero when specified item was successfully removed, positive
value
.B RULEXDB_SPECIAL
when this record is already deleted, or negative error code in the
case of other failure.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B RULEXDB_FAILURE
Referenced database has not been opened, internal data structures are
corrupted or some other general failure has occurred.
.TP
.B RULEXDB_EPARM
The argument
.I rulexdb
or
.I item_type
has an invalid value.
.TP
.B RULEXDB_EACCESS
The database is not opened for updating or the dataset was never
accessed sequentially yet.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rulexdb_classify (3),
.BR rulexdb_close (3),
.BR rulexdb_dataset_name (3),
.BR rulexdb_discard_dictionary (3),
.BR rulexdb_discard_ruleset (3),
.BR rulexdb_fetch_rule (3),
.BR rulexdb_lexbase (3),
.BR rulexdb_load_ruleset (3),
.BR rulexdb_open (3),
.BR rulexdb_remove_item (3),
.BR rulexdb_remove_rule (3),
.BR rulexdb_retrieve_item (3),
.BR rulexdb_search (3),
.BR rulexdb_seq (3),
.BR rulexdb_subscribe_item (3),
.BR rulexdb_subscribe_rule (3)
.SH AUTHOR
Igor B. Poretsky <poretsky@mlbox.ru>.
