.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH RULEXDB_DISCARD_DICTIONARY 3 "February 22, 2012"
.SH NAME
rulexdb_discard_dictionary \- remove specified dictionary dataset from a rulex database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <rulexdb.h>
.sp
.BI "int rulexdb_discard_dictionary(RULEXDB *" rulexdb ", int " item_type );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR rulexdb_discard_dictionary ()
function removes all data from dictionary dataset specified by
.I item_type
argument that may accept one of the following values:
.TP
.B RULEXDB_LEXBASE
Discard the \fBImplicit\fP dictionary.
.TP
.B RULEXDB_EXCEPTION
Discard the \fBExplicit\fP dictionary.
.PP
Note that the data type must be specified explicitly. The value
.B RULEXDB_DEFAULT
is not allowed here.
.PP
The argument
.I rulexdb
references the database to deal with.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
The
.BR rulexdb_discard_dictionary ()
function returns number of deleted records or negative error code.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B RULEXDB_FAILURE
Referenced database has not been opened, internal data structures are
corrupted or some other general failure has occurred.
.TP
.B RULEXDB_EPARM
Invalid arguments are specified.
.TP
.B RULEXDB_EACCESS
The database is not opened for updating.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rulexdb_classify (3),
.BR rulexdb_close (3),
.BR rulexdb_dataset_name (3),
.BR rulexdb_discard_ruleset (3),
.BR rulexdb_fetch_rule (3),
.BR rulexdb_lexbase (3),
.BR rulexdb_open (3),
.BR rulexdb_remove_item (3),
.BR rulexdb_remove_rule (3),
.BR rulexdb_remove_this_item (3),
.BR rulexdb_search (3),
.BR rulexdb_seq (3),
.BR rulexdb_subscribe_item (3),
.BR rulexdb_subscribe_rule (3)
.SH AUTHOR
Igor B. Poretsky <poretsky@mlbox.ru>.
