.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH RULEXDB_SEARCH 3 "February 20, 2012"
.SH NAME
rulexdb_search \- search rulex database for specified word
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <rulexdb.h>
.sp
.BI "int rulexdb_search(RULEXDB *" rulexdb ", const char *" key \
", char *" value ", int " flags );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR rulexdb_search ()
function searches the database referenced by
.I rulexdb
argument and tries to guess pronunciation for the word specified by
string pointed by
.I key
argument according to the acquired info. The resulting string is
 placed into the buffer pointed by
.I value
argument. This buffer must have enough space for it. When no useful
 info is found, the original word is copied to the
.I value
buffer and
.B RULEXDB_SPECIAL
code is returned.
.PP
At first search is performed in the \fBExplicit\fP dictionary. If it
 succeeds, the result is returned and procedure exits
 successfully. Otherwise the word is treated as an implicit form and
 program tries to guess its base and find it in the \fBImplicit\fP
 dictionary. If this process succeeds, the pronunciation string is
 constructed according to the acquired data and procedure exits
 successfully. At last, the word is matched against general rules. If
 no match succeeds, then program exits with
.B RULEXDB_SPECIAL
code, returning the original word as a result.
.PP
If this process appears to be not fully unsuccessful and some
information was found in the database, then the resulting string is
matched against correction rules and the first matched one is applied
if any.
.PP
The last argument specifies which steps of the described process are
to be performed. It consists of the following flags which may be
.RI bitwise- or 'd
to form wanted search mode:
.TP
.B RULEXDB_EXCEPTIONS
Search the word in the exceptions dictionary.
.TP
.B RULEXDB_FORMS
Try to treat specified word as an implicit form.
.TP
.B RULEXDB_RULES
Try to apply general rules.
.TP
Zero value (no flags) means that full search (all stages) should be
performed.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
The
.BR rulexdb_search ()
function returns
.B RULEXDB_SUCCESS
which is zero upon success, positive value
.B RULEXDB_SPECIAL
when specified word was not found, or
negative error code if something is wrong.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B RULEXDB_FAILURE
Referenced database has not been opened, internal data structures are
corrupted or some other general failure has occurred.
.TP
.B RULEXDB_EMALLOC
Internal memory allocation error.
.TP
.B RULEXDB_EINVKEY
Invalid key specified.
.TP
.B RULEXDB_EPARM
Invalid parameters are specified.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rulexdb_classify (3),
.BR rulexdb_close (3),
.BR rulexdb_dataset_name (3),
.BR rulexdb_discard_dictionary (3),
.BR rulexdb_discard_ruleset (3),
.BR rulexdb_fetch_rule (3),
.BR rulexdb_lexbase (3),
.BR rulexdb_load_ruleset (3),
.BR rulexdb_open (3),
.BR rulexdb_remove_item (3),
.BR rulexdb_remove_rule (3),
.BR rulexdb_remove_this_item (3),
.BR rulexdb_seq (3),
.BR rulexdb_subscribe_item (3),
.BR rulexdb_subscribe_rule (3)
.SH AUTHOR
Igor B. Poretsky <poretsky@mlbox.ru>.
